# Setup Developer Toolbelt

[Back to Table of Contents](./README.md)

## Learning Resources

* [Getting Started](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/)
* [How the Web Works](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/How_the_Web_works)
* [Website Design and Process](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/What_will_your_website_look_like)
* [JavaScript Basics](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/JavaScript_basics)
* [Introduction to HTML](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/)
* [Getting Started with HTML](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/Document_and_website_structure)
* [HTML Document Structure](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/Document_and_website_structure)
* [Metadata in HTML](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/The_head_metadata_in_HTML)
* [How to start to design a Website](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Thinking_before_coding)
* [Semantics](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Semantics)
* [What is JavaScript?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/First_steps/What_is_JavaScript)

## Questions

**1. Compose a short poem describing how HTTP sends data between computers.**  

First, the browser goes to the DNS  
and finds the website server's real address.  
Then, the server gets an HTTP request  
for a copy of a website - he mustn't jest.

If the client plea is approved,  
a "200 OK" message is moved  
together with website files as packets.  
This happens quietly, there is no racket. 

The browser, then, assembles the small chunks  
into a website for all to enjoy, even the punks.  
That is how data is transferred between computers with HTTP.  
Oh, and this poem was inspired by Snoop D-O-double G.

**2. Describe how HTML, CSS, and JS files are “parsed” in the browser.**

* The browser parses the HTML file first, and that leads to the browser recognizing any *link*-element references to external CSS stylesheets and any *script*-element references to scripts.
* As the browser parses the HTML, it sends requests back to the server for any CSS files it has found from *link* elements, and any JavaScript files it has found from *script* elements, and from those, then parses the CSS and JavaScript.
* The browser generates an in-memory DOM tree from the parsed HTML, generates an in-memory CSSOM structure from the parsed CSS, and compiles and executes the parsed JavaScript.

* As the browser builds the DOM tree and applies the styles from the CSSOM tree and executes the JavaScript, a visual representation of the page is painted to the screen, and the user sees the page content and can begin to interact with it.


**3. How can you find images to add to a Website?**

To choose an image, go to Google Images and search for something suitable.

1. When you find the image you want, click on the image to get an enlarged view of it.
2. Right-click the image (Ctrl + click on a Mac), choose Save Image As…, and choose a safe place to save your image. Alternatively, copy the image's web address from your browser's address bar for later use.

Note that most images on the web, including in Google Images, are copyrighted. To reduce your likelihood of violating copyright, you can use Google's license filter. Click on the Tools button, then on the resulting Usage rights option that appears below. You should choose the option Creative Commons licenses.

**4. How do you create a *String* vs a *Number* in JavaScript?**  

To signify that the value is a string, enclose it in single or double quote marks.

    let myVariable = 'Bob'; or
    let myVariable = "Bob";

Numbers don't have quotes around them.

    let myVariable = 10;

**5. What is a *Variable* and why are they important in JavaScript?**

Variables are containers that store values. You start by declaring a variable with the let keyword, followed by the name you give to the variable:

    let myVariable;

A semicolon at the end of a line indicates where a statement ends. It is only required when you need to separate statements on a single line. However, some people believe it's good practice to have semicolons at the end of each statement. There are other rules for when you should and shouldn't use semicolons.

You can name a variable nearly anything, but there are some restrictions.

JavaScript is case sensitive. This means *myVariable* is not the same as myvariable. If you have problems in your code, check the case!

After declaring a variable, you can give it a value:

    myVariable = "Bob";

Also, you can do both these operations on the same line:

    let myVariable = "Bob";

You retrieve the value by calling the variable name:

    myVariable;

After assigning a value to a variable, you can change it later in the code:

    let myVariable = "Bob";
    myVariable = "Steve";

**6. What is an HTML attribute?**

    <p class="jabroni">My cat is very sneaky.</p>

Attributes contain extra information about the element that won't appear in the content. In this example, the class attribute is an identifying name used to target the element with style information.

An attribute should have:

* A space between it and the element name. (For an element with more than one attribute, the attributes should be separated by spaces too.)
* The attribute name, followed by an equal sign.
* An attribute value, wrapped with opening and closing quote marks.

**7. Describe the anatomy of an HTML element.**

The anatomy of our element is:

* **The opening tag**: This consists of the name of the element (in this example, p for paragraph), wrapped in opening and closing angle brackets. This opening tag marks where the element begins or starts to take effect. In this example, it precedes the start of the paragraph text.
* **The content**: This is the content of the element. In this example, it is the paragraph text.
* **The closing tag**: This is the same as the opening tag, except that it includes a forward slash before the element name. This marks where the element ends. Failing to include a closing tag is a common beginner error that can produce peculiar results.

The element is the opening tag, followed by content, followed by the closing tag.

**8. What is the difference between *article* and *section* element tags?**

* ***article*** encloses a block of related content that makes sense on its own without the rest of the page (e.g., a single blog post).
* ***section*** is similar to ***article***, but it is more for grouping together a single part of the page that constitutes one single piece of functionality (e.g., a mini map, or a set of article headlines and summaries), or a theme. It's considered best practice to begin each section with a heading; also note that you can break ***article*** up into different ***section***, or ***section*** up into different ***article***, depending on the context.

**9. What elements does a “typical” website include?**

   
    <main> is for content unique to this page. Use <main> only once per page, and put it directly inside <body>. Ideally this shouldn't be nested within other elements.

    <article> encloses a block of related content that makes sense on its own without the rest of the page (e.g., a single blog post).

    <section> is In the example we saw above, this line was included:

<meta charset="utf-8" />

This element specifies the document's character encoding — the character set that the document is permitted to use. utf-8 is a universal character set that includes pretty much any character from any human language. This means that your web page will be able to handle displaying any language; it's therefore a good idea to set this on every web page you create!n provide additional information indirectly related to it (glossary entries, author biography, related links, etc.).

    <header> represents a group of introductory content. If it is a child of <body> it defines the global header of a webpage, but if it's a child of an <article> or <section> it defines a specific header for that section (try not to confuse this with titles and headings).

    <nav> contains the main navigation functionality for the page. Secondary links, etc., would not go in the navigation.

    <footer> represents a group of end content for a page.

    <span> is an inline non-semantic element, which you should only use if you can't think of a better semantic text element to wrap your content, or don't want to add any specific meaning.

    <div> is a block level non-semantic element, which you should only use if you can't think of a better semantic block element to use, or don't want to add any specific meaning.

    <br> creates a line break in a paragraph; it is the only way to force a rigid structure in a situation where you want a series of fixed short lines, such as in a postal address or a poem.

**10. How does metadata influence Search Engine Optimization?**

Many *meta* elements include name and content attributes:

    name specifies the type of meta element it is; what type of information it contains.
    content specifies the actual meta content.

Two such meta elements that are useful to include on your page define the author of the page, and provide a concise description of the page. Let's look at an example:

    <meta name="author" content="Chris Mills" />
    <meta name="description" content="The MDN Web Docs Learning Area aims to provide complete beginners to the Web with all they need to know to get started with developing websites and applications." />

Specifying an author is beneficial in many ways: it is useful to be able to understand who wrote the page, if you have any questions about the content and you would like to contact them. Some content management systems have facilities to automatically extract page author information and make it available for such purposes.

Specifying a description that includes keywords relating to the content of your page is useful as it has the potential to make your page appear higher in relevant searches performed in search engines (such activities are termed Search Engine Optimization, or SEO.)

**11. How is the *meta* HTML tag used when specifying metadata?**

Metadata is data that describes data, and HTML has an "official" way of adding metadata to a document — the *meta* element.

In the example we saw above, this line was included:

    <meta charset="utf-8" />

This element specifies the document's character encoding — the character set that the document is permitted to use. utf-8 is a universal character set that includes pretty much any character from any human language. This means that your web page will be able to handle displaying any language; it's therefore a good idea to set this on every web page you create!

**12. What is the first step to designing a Website?**

When starting with a web project, many people focus on the technical side. Of course you must be familiar with the technique of your craft, but what really matters is what you want to accomplish. Yes, it seems obvious, but too many projects fail not from a lack of technical know-how, but from lack of goals and vision.

So when you get an idea and want to turn it into a website, there are a few questions you should answer before anything else:

* What exactly do I want to accomplish?
* How will a website help me reach my goals?
* What needs to be done, and in what order, to reach my goals?

All of this is called project ideation and is a necessary first step to reach your goal, whether you are a beginner or an experienced developer.

**13. What is the most important question to answer when designing a Website?**

    What exactly do I want to accomplish?

This is the most important question to answer, since it drives everything else. List all the goals you want to reach. It can be anything: selling goods to make money, expressing political opinions, meeting new friends, gigging with musicians, collecting cat pictures, or whatever you want.

**14. Why should you use an *h1* element over a *span* element to display a top level heading?**

In HTML, for example, the h1 element is a semantic element, which gives the text it wraps around the role (or meaning) of "a top level heading on your page."

    <h1>This is a top level heading</h1>

By default, most browser's user agent stylesheet will style an h1 with a large font size to make it look like a heading (although you could style it to look like anything you wanted).

On the other hand, you could make any element look like a top level heading. Consider the following:

    <span style="font-size: 32px; margin: 21px 0;">Not a top-level heading!</span>

This will render it to look like a top level heading, but it has no semantic value, so it will not get any extra benefits as described above. It is therefore a good idea to use the right HTML element for the right job.

HTML should be coded to represent the data that will be populated and not based on its default presentation styling. Presentation (how it should look), is the sole responsibility of CSS.

**15. What are the benefits of using semantic tags in our HTML?**

Some of the benefits from writing semantic markup are as follows:

* Search engines will consider its contents as important keywords to influence the page's search rankings (see SEO)
* Screen readers can use it as a signpost to help visually impaired users navigate a page
* Finding blocks of meaningful code is significantly easier than searching through endless divs with or without semantic or namespaced classes
* Suggests to the developer the type of data that will be populated
* Semantic naming mirrors proper custom element/component naming

When approaching which markup to use, ask yourself, "What element(s) best describe/represent the data that I'm going to populate?" For example, is it a list of data?; ordered, unordered?; is it an article with sections and an aside of related information?; does it list out definitions?; is it a figure or image that needs a caption?; should it have a header and a footer in addition to the global site-wide header and footer?; etc.

**16. Describe 2 things that require JavaScript in the Browser?**

Browser APIs are built into your web browser, and are able to expose data from the surrounding computer environment, or do useful complex things. For example:

* The DOM (Document Object Model) API allows you to manipulate HTML and CSS, creating, removing and changing HTML, dynamically applying new styles to your page, etc. Every time you see a popup window appear on a page, or some new content displayed (as we saw above in our simple demo) for example, that's the DOM in action.
* The Geolocation API retrieves geographical information. This is how Google Maps is able to find your location and plot it on a map. 

**17. How can you add JavaScript to an HTML document?**

 JavaScript is applied to your HTML page in a similar manner to CSS. Whereas CSS uses *link* elements to apply external stylesheets and *style* elements to apply internal stylesheets to HTML, JavaScript only needs one friend in the world of HTML — the *script* element. Let's learn how this works.

**Internal JavaScript**

1. First of all, make a local copy of our example file apply-javascript.html. Save it in a directory somewhere sensible.
2. Open the file in your web browser and in your text editor. You'll see that the HTML creates a simple web page containing a clickable button.
3. Next, go to your text editor and add the following in your head — just before your closing *head* tag:

        <script>
        // JavaScript goes here
        </script>

4. Now we'll add some JavaScript inside our *script* element to make the page do something more interesting — add the following code just below the "// JavaScript goes here" line:

        document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", () => {
          function createParagraph() {
            const para = document.createElement("p");
            para.textContent = "You clicked the button!";
            document.body.appendChild(para);
           }

        const buttons = document.querySelectorAll("button");

        for (const button of buttons) {
          button.addEventListener("click", createParagraph);
           }
         });

5. Save your file and refresh the browser — now you should see that when you click the button, a new paragraph is generated and placed below.

**External JavaScript**

This works great, but what if we wanted to put our JavaScript in an external file? Let's explore this now.

1. First, create a new file in the same directory as your sample HTML file. Call it script.js — make sure it has that .js filename extension, as that's how it is recognized as JavaScript.
2. Replace your current *script* element with the following:

        <script src="script.js" defer></script>

3. Inside script.js, add the following script:

        function createParagraph() {
          const para = document.createElement("p");
          para.textContent = "You clicked the button!";
          document.body.appendChild(para);
        }

        const buttons = document.querySelectorAll("button");

        for (const button of buttons) {
          button.addEventListener("click", createParagraph);
        }

4. Save and refresh your browser, and you should see the same thing! It works just the same, but now we've got our JavaScript in an external file. This is generally a good thing in terms of organizing your code and making it reusable across multiple HTML files. Plus, the HTML is easier to read without huge chunks of script dumped in it.

