# Introduction To Web Development

[Back to Table of Contents](../README.md)

## Learning Resources

* [HTML Text Fundamentals](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/HTML_text_fundamentals)
* [HTML Advanced Text Formatting](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/Advanced_text_formatting)
* [How CSS Is Structured](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/First_steps/How_CSS_is_structured)
* [JavaScript Basics](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/JavaScript_basics)
* [Making Decisions In Your Code – Conditionals](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/conditionals)
* [How to Write a Git Commit Message](https://cbea.ms/git-commit/)

## Questions

**1. Why is it important to use semantic elements in our HTML?**  

Semantics are relied on everywhere around us—we rely on previous experience to tell us what the function of an everyday object is; when we see something, we know what its function will be. So, for example, we expect a red traffic light to mean "stop," and a green traffic light to mean "go." Things can get tricky very quickly if the wrong semantics are applied. (Do any countries use red to mean "go"? We hope not.)

In a similar way, we need to make sure we are using the correct elements, giving our content the correct meaning, function, or appearance. In this context, the h1 element is also a semantic element, which gives the text it wraps around the role (or meaning) of "a top level heading on your page."

    <h1>This is a top level heading</h1>

By default, the browser will give it a large font size to make it look like a heading (although you could style it to look like anything you wanted using CSS). More importantly, its semantic value will be used in multiple ways, for example by search engines and screen readers (as mentioned above).

On the other hand, you could make any element look like a top level heading. Consider the following:


    <span style="font-size: 32px; margin: 21px 0; display: block;">
      Is this a top level heading?
    </span>

This is a `<span>` element. It has no semantics. You use it to wrap content when you want to apply CSS to it (or do something to it with JavaScript) without giving it any extra meaning. (You'll find out more about these later on in the course.) We've applied some CSS to it to make it look like a top level heading, but since it has no semantic value, it will not get any of the extra benefits described above. It is a good idea to use the relevant HTML element for the job.

**2. How many levels of headings are there in HTML?**

There are six heading elements: `<h1>`, `<h2>`, `<h3>`, `<h4>`, `<h5>`, and `<h6>`. Each element represents a different level of content in the document; `<h1>` represents the main heading, `<h2>` represents subheadings, `<h3>` represents sub-subheadings, and so on.

**3. What are some uses for the `<sup>` and `<sub>` elements?**

You will occasionally need to use superscript and subscript when marking up items like dates, chemical formulae, and mathematical equations so they have the correct meaning. The `<sup>` and `<sub>` elements handle this job. For example:

    <p>My birthday is on the 25<sup>th</sup> of May 2001.</p>
    <p>
    Caffeine's chemical formula is
    C<sub>8</sub>H<sub>10</sub>N<sub>4</sub>O<sub>2</sub>.
    </p>
    <p>If x<sup>2</sup> is 9, x must equal 3 or -3.</p>

**4. When using the `<abbr>` element, what attribute must be added to provide the full expansion of the term?**  

Another fairly common element you'll meet when looking around the Web is `<abbr>` — this is used to wrap around an abbreviation or acronym. When including either, provide a full expansion of the term in plain text on first use, along with the `<abbr>` to mark up the abbreviation. This provides a hint to user agents on how to announce/display the content while informing all users what the abbreviation means.

If providing the expansion in addition to the abbreviation makes little sense, and the abbreviation or acronym is a fairly shortened term, provide the full expansion of the term as the value of title attribute:

    <p>
    We use <abbr>HTML</abbr>, Hypertext Markup Language, to structure our web
    documents.
    </p>

    <p>
    I think <abbr title="Reverend">Rev.</abbr> Green did it in the kitchen with
    the chainsaw.
    </p>

**5. What are ways we can apply CSS to our HTML?**

External stylesheet, internal stylesheet (within `<style>` element, contained in `<head>` element) and inline style (using a `style` attribute in HTML elements).

**6. Why should we avoid using inline styles?**

  It is the opposite of a best practice. First, it is the least efficient implementation of CSS for maintenance. One styling change might require multiple edits within a single web page. Second, inline CSS also mixes (CSS) presentational code with HTML and content, making everything more difficult to read and understand. Separating code and content makes maintenance easier for all who work on the website.

There are a few circumstances where inline styles are more common. You might have to resort to using inline styles if your working environment is very restrictive. For example, perhaps your CMS only allows you to edit the HTML body. You may also see a lot of inline styles in HTML email to achieve compatibility with as many email clients as possible.

**7. Review the block of code below and answer the following questions:**

    h2 {
        color: black;
        padding: 5px;
    }

**7.1 What is representing the selector?**

`h2` is representing the selector.

**7.2 Which components are the CSS declarations?**

`color: black;` and `padding: 5px;` are CSS declarations. 

The CSS declaration block is represented below:

    {
        color: black;
        padding: 5px;
    }
**7.3 Which components are considered properties?**

`color` and `padding` are CSS properties.

**8. How is the *meta* HTML tag used when specifying metadata?**

Metadata is data that describes data, and HTML has an "official" way of adding metadata to a document — the *meta* element.

In the example we saw above, this line was included:

    <meta charset="utf-8" />

This element specifies the document's character encoding — the character set that the document is permitted to use. utf-8 is a universal character set that includes pretty much any character from any human language. This means that your web page will be able to handle displaying any language; it's therefore a good idea to set this on every web page you create!

**12. What is the first step to designing a Website?**

When starting with a web project, many people focus on the technical side. Of course you must be familiar with the technique of your craft, but what really matters is what you want to accomplish. Yes, it seems obvious, but too many projects fail not from a lack of technical know-how, but from lack of goals and vision.

So when you get an idea and want to turn it into a website, there are a few questions you should answer before anything else:

* What exactly do I want to accomplish?
* How will a website help me reach my goals?
* What needs to be done, and in what order, to reach my goals?

All of this is called project ideation and is a necessary first step to reach your goal, whether you are a beginner or an experienced developer.

**13. What is the most important question to answer when designing a Website?**

    What exactly do I want to accomplish?

This is the most important question to answer, since it drives everything else. List all the goals you want to reach. It can be anything: selling goods to make money, expressing political opinions, meeting new friends, gigging with musicians, collecting cat pictures, or whatever you want.

**14. Why should you use an *h1* element over a *span* element to display a top level heading?**

In HTML, for example, the h1 element is a semantic element, which gives the text it wraps around the role (or meaning) of "a top level heading on your page."

    <h1>This is a top level heading</h1>

By default, most browser's user agent stylesheet will style an h1 with a large font size to make it look like a heading (although you could style it to look like anything you wanted).

On the other hand, you could make any element look like a top level heading. Consider the following:

    <span style="font-size: 32px; margin: 21px 0;">Not a top-level heading!</span>

This will render it to look like a top level heading, but it has no semantic value, so it will not get any extra benefits as described above. It is therefore a good idea to use the right HTML element for the right job.

HTML should be coded to represent the data that will be populated and not based on its default presentation styling. Presentation (how it should look), is the sole responsibility of CSS.

**15. What are the benefits of using semantic tags in our HTML?**

Some of the benefits from writing semantic markup are as follows:

* Search engines will consider its contents as important keywords to influence the page's search rankings (see SEO)
* Screen readers can use it as a signpost to help visually impaired users navigate a page
* Finding blocks of meaningful code is significantly easier than searching through endless divs with or without semantic or namespaced classes
* Suggests to the developer the type of data that will be populated
* Semantic naming mirrors proper custom element/component naming

When approaching which markup to use, ask yourself, "What element(s) best describe/represent the data that I'm going to populate?" For example, is it a list of data?; ordered, unordered?; is it an article with sections and an aside of related information?; does it list out definitions?; is it a figure or image that needs a caption?; should it have a header and a footer in addition to the global site-wide header and footer?; etc.

**16. Describe 2 things that require JavaScript in the Browser?**

Browser APIs are built into your web browser, and are able to expose data from the surrounding computer environment, or do useful complex things. For example:

* The DOM (Document Object Model) API allows you to manipulate HTML and CSS, creating, removing and changing HTML, dynamically applying new styles to your page, etc. Every time you see a popup window appear on a page, or some new content displayed (as we saw above in our simple demo) for example, that's the DOM in action.
* The Geolocation API retrieves geographical information. This is how Google Maps is able to find your location and plot it on a map. 

**17. How can you add JavaScript to an HTML document?**

 JavaScript is applied to your HTML page in a similar manner to CSS. Whereas CSS uses *link* elements to apply external stylesheets and *style* elements to apply internal stylesheets to HTML, JavaScript only needs one friend in the world of HTML — the *script* element. Let's learn how this works.

**Internal JavaScript**

1. First of all, make a local copy of our example file apply-javascript.html. Save it in a directory somewhere sensible.
2. Open the file in your web browser and in your text editor. You'll see that the HTML creates a simple web page containing a clickable button.
3. Next, go to your text editor and add the following in your head — just before your closing *head* tag:

        <script>
        // JavaScript goes here
        </script>

4. Now we'll add some JavaScript inside our *script* element to make the page do something more interesting — add the following code just below the "// JavaScript goes here" line:

        document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", () => {
          function createParagraph() {
            const para = document.createElement("p");
            para.textContent = "You clicked the button!";
            document.body.appendChild(para);
           }

        const buttons = document.querySelectorAll("button");

        for (const button of buttons) {
          button.addEventListener("click", createParagraph);
           }
         });

5. Save your file and refresh the browser — now you should see that when you click the button, a new paragraph is generated and placed below.

**External JavaScript**

This works great, but what if we wanted to put our JavaScript in an external file? Let's explore this now.

1. First, create a new file in the same directory as your sample HTML file. Call it script.js — make sure it has that .js filename extension, as that's how it is recognized as JavaScript.
2. Replace your current *script* element with the following:

        <script src="script.js" defer></script>

3. Inside script.js, add the following script:

        function createParagraph() {
          const para = document.createElement("p");
          para.textContent = "You clicked the button!";
          document.body.appendChild(para);
        }

        const buttons = document.querySelectorAll("button");

        for (const button of buttons) {
          button.addEventListener("click", createParagraph);
        }

4. Save and refresh your browser, and you should see the same thing! It works just the same, but now we've got our JavaScript in an external file. This is generally a good thing in terms of organizing your code and making it reusable across multiple HTML files. Plus, the HTML is easier to read without huge chunks of script dumped in it.

