# 102-3 Revisions and the Cloud

[Back to Table of Contents](../README.md)

## Learning Resources
* [Git Intro](https://blog.udemy.com/git-tutorial-a-comprehensive-guide/)

## Questions

**1. What is Version Control?**

Version Control is a system that allows you to revisit various versions of a file or set of files by recording changes. Through version control, one can revert a file or project to a previous version, track modifications and modifying individuals, and compare changes. By utilizing a Version Control System (VCS), mistakes with files can easily be rectified.

**2. What is *cloning* in Git?**  

You can also create a copy of an existing Git repository from a particular server by using the clone command with a repository’s URL:

    $ git clone https://github.com/test

By cloning the file, you have copied all versions of all files for a project. This command leads to the creation of a directory called “test,” with an initialized .git directory inside it, which has copies of all versions of all files for the specified project. The command also automatically checks out — or retrieves for editing — a copy of the newest version of the project.

To clone a repository into a directory with another name of your choosing, use the following command format:

    $ git clone https://github.com/test mydirectory

The command above makes a copy of the target repository in a directory named “mydirectory.”


**3. What is the command to track and stage files?**  

***Single File***

Track one file only by using the following format:

    git add filename

***All Files***

Track all files in a repository by using the following command:

    $ git add *

*After using these commands, files are tracked and staged for committing.*

After adding a new file called EXAMPLE, you would see information regarding changes to be committed when using the *git status* command:

    $ git status

    On branch master

    Changes to be committed:

      (use "git reset HEAD ..." to unstage)

    new file: EXAMPLE

This information tells us that there are changes to be committed and that the file has been staged.

**4. What is the command to take a snapshot of your changed files?**  

***Committing a File***

After staging one or multiple files, you should commit the changes and record what you did within the commit message:

    $ git commit -m “made change x,y,z”

*This step has committed changes for the file or files (you can have one commit message for multiple files, if applicable) to the HEAD.*  

***Committing All Changes***

    $ git commit -a

*This command commits a snapshot of all modifications to tracked files in the working directory.*

**5. What is the command to send your changed files to Github?**  

***Pushing Changes***

Next, you would push changes to a remote repository. We will discuss remote repositories in more depth in the next section. For now, we will look at a general overview of pushing changes to remotes.

Example:

    $ git push origin master

*This command pushes changes from the local “master” branch to the remote repository named “origin”.*

*For cloned repositories, Git will automatically give the name “origin” to the server from which you cloned and the name “master” to your local repository. However, these names can be changed by the user.*
