# Operators and Loops

[Back to Table of Contents](./README.md)

## Learning Resources

* [Expressions and Operators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Expressions_and_Operators)
* [Loops](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Loops_and_iteration)

## Questions

**1. What is *an expression* in JavaScript?**  

At a high level, an expression is a valid unit of code that resolves to a value. There are two types of expressions: those that have side effects (such as assigning values) and those that purely evaluate.

The expression *x = 7* is an example of the first type. This expression uses the = operator to assign the value seven to the variable x. The expression itself evaluates to 7.

The expression *3 + 4* is an example of the second type. This expression uses the + operator to add 3 and 4 together and produces a value, 7. However, if it's not eventually part of a bigger construct (for example, a variable declaration like const *z = 3 + 4*), its result will be immediately discarded — this is usually a programmer mistake because the evaluation doesn't produce any effects.

**2. Why would we use a loop in our code?**

 Loops offer a quick and easy way to do something repeatedly. This chapter of the JavaScript Guide introduces the different iteration statements available to JavaScript.

You can think of a loop as a computerized version of the game where you tell someone to take X steps in one direction, then Y steps in another. For example, the idea "Go five steps to the east" could be expressed this way as a loop:

    for (let step = 0; step < 5; step++) {
    // Runs 5 times, with values of step 0 through 4.
    console.log("Walking east one step");
    }

There are many different kinds of loops, but they all essentially do the same thing: they repeat an action some number of times. (Note that it's possible that number could be zero!)

The various loop mechanisms offer different ways to determine the start and end points of the loop. There are various situations that are more easily served by one type of loop over the others. 

**3. When does a *for* loop stop executing?**

A for loop repeats until a specified condition evaluates to false.

A for statement looks as follows:

    for (initialization; condition; afterthought)
     statement

When a for loop executes, the following occurs:

1. The initializing expression initialization, if any, is executed. This expression usually initializes one or more loop counters, but the syntax allows an expression of any degree of complexity. This expression can also declare variables.

2. The condition expression is evaluated. If the value of condition is true, the loop statements execute. Otherwise, the for loop terminates. (If the condition expression is omitted entirely, the condition is assumed to be true.)

3. The statement executes. To execute multiple statements, use a block statement ({ }) to group those statements.
    
4. If present, the update expression afterthought is executed.

5. Control returns to Step 2.

**4. How many times will a *while* loop execute?**  

A while statement executes its statements as long as a specified condition evaluates to true. A while statement looks as follows:

    while (condition)
      statement

If the condition becomes false, statement within the loop stops executing and control passes to the statement following the loop.

The condition test occurs before statement in the loop is executed. If the condition returns true, statement is executed and the condition is tested again. If the condition returns false, execution stops, and control is passed to the statement following while.

To execute multiple statements, use a block statement ({ }) to group those statements.  

