# 102-2 The Coder's Computer  

## Learning Resources  

* [Choosing a Text Editor](https://codefellows.github.io/code-102-guide/curriculum/class-02/Choosing-A-Text-Editor--The-Older-Coder.pdf)
* [The Command Line](https://ryanstutorials.net/linuxtutorial/commandline.php)  
* [Basic Navigation](https://ryanstutorials.net/linuxtutorial/navigation.php)
* [About Files](https://ryanstutorials.net/linuxtutorial/aboutfiles.php)

## Questions  

1. What are four important features to look for in a text editor?

The four features to look out for when choosing a text editor are:

* code completion;
* syntax highlighting;
* a nice variety of themes (to reduce eye strain and fatigue);
* healthy selection of extensions when needed;
g
2. What do the following commands do?
    1. pwd  
    pwd command displays the present working directory. 
    2. ls  
    ls command lists all files and directories in the present working directory.  
    3. cd
    cd command changes directory to another one (must include a target directory).  
    4. mkdir
    mkdir command creates a new directory (must include the name of the new one).  
    5. touch  
    touch command creates a new file (must include name and file extension).  
3. Can you explain what is happening in the following scenario if these commands and arguments are entered into the command line? (Arguments are extra instructions given to a command.)
    1. cd projects  
    "cd projects" changes the present working directory to "projects".  
    2. mkdir new-project  
    "mkdir new-project" creates a new directory named "new-project".
    3. touch new-project/newfile.md  
    "touch new-project/newfile.md" creates newfile.md in new-project directory (creates the directory, if it is not there).
    4. cd ..  
    "cd .." changes present working directory to the parent directory.
    5. ls projects/new-project  
    "ls projects/new-project" will list all the files and directories in the projects/new-project directory.
