# Programming with JavaScript

[Back to Table of Contents](../README.md)

## Learning Resources

* [MDN Control Flow](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Control_flow)
* [Functions](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_functions.asp)
* [Operators](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_operators.asp)
* [Expressions and Operators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Expressions_and_Operators)
* [MDN Functions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Functions)

## Questions

**1. What is *control flow*?**  

The control flow is the order in which the computer executes statements in a script.

Code is run in order from the first line in the file to the last line, unless the computer runs across the (extremely frequent) structures that change the control flow, such as conditionals and loops.

For example, imagine a script used to validate user data from a webpage form. The script submits validated data, but if the user, say, leaves a required field empty, the script prompts them to fill it in. To do this, the script uses a conditional structure or if...else, so that different code executes depending on whether the form is complete or not:

    if (isEmpty(field)) {
     promptUser();
    } else {
     submitForm();
    }

**2. What is a JavaScript *function*?**

Functions are one of the fundamental building blocks in JavaScript. A function in JavaScript is similar to a procedure—a set of statements that performs a task or calculates a value, but for a procedure to qualify as a function, it should take some input and return an output where there is some obvious relationship between the input and the output. To use a function, you must define it somewhere in the scope from which you wish to call it.

***Function declarations***

A function definition (also called a function declaration, or function statement) consists of the function keyword, followed by:

* The name of the function.
* A list of parameters to the function, enclosed in parentheses and separated by commas.
* The JavaScript statements that define the function, enclosed in curly brackets, { /* … */ }.

For example, the following code defines a simple function named square:

    function square(number) {
      return number * number;
    }

The function square takes one parameter, called number. The function consists of one statement that says to return the parameter of the function (that is, number) multiplied by itself. The statement return specifies the value returned by the function:

    return number * number;

**3. What does it mean to *invoke* or *call* a function?**

Defining a function does not execute it. Defining it names the function and specifies what to do when the function is called.

Calling the function actually performs the specified actions with the indicated parameters. For example, if you define the function square, you could call it as follows:

    square(5);

The preceding statement calls the function with an argument of 5. The function executes its statements and returns the value 25.

Functions must be in scope when they are called, but the function declaration can be hoisted (appear below the call in the code). The scope of a function declaration is the function in which it is declared (or the entire program, if it is declared at the top level).

The arguments of a function are not limited to strings and numbers. You can pass whole objects to a function. The showProps() function (defined in Working with objects) is an example of a function that takes an object as an argument.

A function can call itself. For example, here is a function that computes factorials recursively:

    function factorial(n) {
    if (n === 0 || n === 1) {
        return 1;
      } else {
        return n * factorial(n - 1);
      }
    }

You could then compute the factorials of 1 through 5 as follows:

    console.log(factorial(1)); // 1
    console.log(factorial(2)); // 2
    console.log(factorial(3)); // 6
    console.log(factorial(4)); // 24
    console.log(factorial(5)); // 120

There are other ways to call functions. There are often cases where a function needs to be called dynamically, or the number of arguments to a function vary, or in which the context of the function call needs to be set to a specific object determined at runtime.

**4. What are the parenthesis *()* for when you define a function?**  

It houses a list of parameters to the function, separated by commas.

