# Structure Web Pages with HTML

## Learning Resources

* [Wireframe and Design](https://careerfoundry.com/en/blog/ux-design/how-to-create-your-first-wireframe/)
* [Mozilla HTML Basics](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/HTML_basics)
* [Semantics](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Semantics)
* [Mozilla HTML Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML)
* [Mozilla HTML Elements](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element)

## Questions

**1. What is HTML and why do we use it?**

HTML is a markup language that defines the structure of your content. HTML consists of a series of elements, which you use to enclose, or wrap, different parts of the content to make it appear a certain way, or act a certain way. The enclosing tags can make a word or image hyperlink to somewhere else, can italicize words, can make the font bigger or smaller, and so on. For example, take the following line of content:

    My cat is very grumpy

If we wanted the line to stand by itself, we could specify that it is a paragraph by enclosing it in paragraph tags:

    <p>My cat is very grumpy</p>


**2. What are the 3 main parts of an HTML element?**

The main parts of our element are as follows:

* **The opening tag:** This consists of the name of the element (in this case, p), wrapped in opening and closing angle brackets. This states where the element begins or starts to take effect — in this case where the paragraph begins.

* **The closing tag:** This is the same as the opening tag, except that it includes a forward slash before the element name. This states where the element ends — in this case where the paragraph ends. Failing to add a closing tag is one of the standard beginner errors and can lead to strange results.

* **The content:** This is the content of the element, which in this case, is just text.

* **The element:** The opening tag, the closing tag, and the content together comprise the element.

**3. What is it called when you give an element extra information?**

 Attributes contain extra information about the element that you don't want to appear in the actual content. Here, class is the attribute name and editor-note is the attribute value. The class attribute allows you to give the element a non-unique identifier that can be used to target it (and any other elements with the same class value) with style information and other things. Some attributes have no value, such as required.

Attributes that set a value always have:

* A space between it and the element name (or the previous attribute, if the element already has one or more attributes).
* The attribute name followed by an equal sign.
* The attribute value wrapped by opening and closing quotation marks.

**4. What is a semantic element?**

HTML should be coded to represent the data that will be populated and not based on its default presentation styling. Presentation (how it should look), is the sole responsibility of CSS.

Some of the benefits from writing semantic markup are as follows:

* Search engines will consider its contents as important keywords to influence the page's search rankings (see SEO)
* Screen readers can use it as a signpost to help visually impaired users navigate a page
* Finding blocks of meaningful code is significantly easier than searching through endless divs with or without semantic or namespaced classes
* Suggests to the developer the type of data that will be populated
* Semantic naming mirrors proper custom element/component naming

When approaching which markup to use, ask yourself, "What element(s) best describe/represent the data that I'm going to populate?" For example, is it a list of data?; ordered, unordered?; is it an article with sections and an aside of related information?; does it list out definitions?; is it a figure or image that needs a caption?; should it have a header and a footer in addition to the global site-wide header and footer?; etc.

These are some of the roughly 100 semantic elements available:

    <article>
    <aside>
    <details>
    <figcaption>
    <figure>
    <form>
    <footer>
    <header>
    <main>
    <mark>
    <nav>
    <section>
    <summary>
    <time>
